as global temperatures rise water on
Earth's surface
evaporates faster
creating more clouds and more storms
look down over the Atlantic satellites
capture clouds shifting into shape they
begin to spy one
and race like all hurricanes
this storm is given a name
Harvey
hurricanes inherently are dangerous the
strongest storm I've been in been well
over 150 mile-an-hour wind very strong
winds and it's a pretty impressive thing
and you really respect mother nature
major Kendall Dunn and his crew a part
of the US air force reserve 53rd weather
reconnaissance squadron the Hurricane
Hunters so the overall mission of the
53rd hurricane hunters is to find the
fix the center zero wind inside of a
hurricane
to collect data crucial to understanding
where the hurricane will make land they
must fly into Harvey okay
now scoop NHL chairman
[Music]
there are at 1:02 tickle
all right here we go aircraft operating
manual suggests not flying through heavy
precipitation or thunderstorms but we
have to
officials high in the United States
military said hey we'll accept that risk
because the data is so valuable we'll
put our lives on the line to go get it
[Music]
I like Ariel zero
just don't know what you're gonna be
faced with
the hurricane hunters are closing in on
Harvey
it's now 200 miles across
with wind speeds of over a hundred miles
per hour
the satellites got a good picture but
until you get into that storm nobody
really knows
this could be bad the radar sides of
this thing it just takes up the entire
goal number one yanking contact back and
forth under one three five Bob's coming
up shortly
once we're starting to hit the heavier
turbulence hitting the tropical storm
type weather we just have to lock it in
and we're there for the ride there comes
once we're getting out I wall the wind
speeds begin to pick up everybody's
paying attention you can hear the
airplane itself begin to accelerate
decelerate you could just feel the
pressure against the controls the
aircraft begins to do what the storm
wants it to do not what you want it to
do
get your heart racing a little bit kind
of rub the old aircraft and just until
oh come on girl and then you pop out in
the middle of the high and it's one of
the most beautiful things you've ever
seen the strongest storms will get into
a stadium effect you could see all the
way up this could rise up to 40,000 feet
it's so strong that it's pulling all
clouds to the edge there's nothing in
the middle
we are trying to find the center we're
actually looking for wind speeds zero
once in position the crew release
weather instruments see the surface
clear the job
they record pressure temperature
humidity and wind data as they fall
towards the surface that's the
information National Hurricane Center
wants to see that's what people want a
ground want to know hey where is this
thing exactly and then based on that
they could take that data and figure out
how strong it is from that center point
you don't really know somebody till you
give them a hug and basically we're out
there hugging storms and once we get out
there do that we know I'm pretty
intimately the data reveals that Harvey
will make landfall in just eight hours
triggering an evacuation down the coast
it's one of the only military missions
out there that you're making an instant
impact while we're still flying they're
taking that data and issuing warnings to
millions of people before we even land
that information is being put out people
are evacuating and as you're flying you
look down and you see houses along the
beach you realize those people's lives
probably never be the same
[Music]
satellite images taken over Texas reveal
the aftermath of devastating flooding
caused by over 140 centimeters of rain
Harvey was one of the most powerful
storms to hit the US and the wettest in
American history it's predicted that an
ever warming planet will produce more
storms but with the help of the
Hurricane Hunters and a view from space
we can prepare for them
you